---
title: Reactive Certificate-Based Client Authentication in HTTP/2
abbrev: HTTP/2 Client Certs
docname: draft-thomson-http2-client-certs-latest
date: 2015
category: std
updates: 7450

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup: HTTP
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Thomson
    name: Martin Thomson
    organization: Mozilla
    email: martin.thomson@gmail.com

 -
    ins: M. Bishop
    name: Mike Bishop
    organization: Microsoft
    email: michael.bishop@microsoft.com

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC5246:
  RFC5746:
  RFC7230:
  RFC7301:
  RFC7540:
  RFC7627:
  I-D.ietf-tls-tls13:

informative:



--- abstract

Some HTTP servers provide a subset of resources that require additional
authentication to interact with.  HTTP/1.1 servers rely on TLS renegotiation
that is triggered by a request to a protected resource.  HTTP/2 made this
pattern impossible by forbidding the use of TLS renegotiation.

This document describes a how client authentication might be requested by a
server as a result of receiving a request to a protected resource.  This
document updates RFC 7540 to allow TLS renegotiation in limited circumstances.


--- middle

# Introduction

Many existing HTTP [RFC7230] servers have different authentication requirements
for the different resources they serve.  Of the bountiful authentication options
available for authenticating HTTP requests, client certificates present a unique
challenge for resource-specific authentication requirements because of the
interaction with the underlying TLS [RFC5246][I-D.ietf-tls-tls13] layer.

For servers that wish to use client certificates to authenticate users, they
might request client authentication during the TLS handshake.  However, if not
all users or resources need certificate-based authentication, a request for a
certificate has the unfortunate consequence of triggering the client to seek a
certificate.  Such a request can result in a poor experience, particular when
sent to a client that does not expect the request.

The TLS CertificateRequest can be used by servers to give clients hints about
which certificate to offer.  Servers that rely on certificate-based
authentication might request different certificates for different resources.
Such a server cannot use contextual information about the resource to construct
an appropriate TLS CertificateRequest message during the initial handshake.

Consequently, client certificates are requested at connection establishment time
only in cases where all clients are expected or required to have a single
certificate that is used for all resources.  Many other uses for client
certificates are reactive, that is, certificates are requested in response to
the client making a request.

CAVEAT:
: As of 2015-10-02, TLS 1.3 does not include the client authentication features
  this draft relies on.  While these features have been agreed in the TLS
  working group, the exact design is still under revision.  The basic
  functionality shouldn't change in a way that will affect this document, though
  some details such as field names are highly likely to change.


## Reactive Certificate Authentication in HTTP/1.1

In HTTP/1.1, a server that relies on client authentication for a subset of users
or resources does not request a certificate when the connection is established.
Instead, it only requests a client certificate when a request is made to a
resource that requires a certificate.

{{ex-http11}} shows the server initiating a TLS-layer renegotiation in response
to receiving an HTTP/1.1 request to a protected resource.

~~~
Client                                      Server
   -- (HTTP) GET /protected -------------------> *1
   <---------------------- (TLS) HelloRequest -- *2
   -- (TLS) ClientHello ----------------------->
   <------------------ (TLS) ServerHello, ... --
   <---------------- (TLS) CertificateRequest -- *3
   -- (TLS) ..., Certificate ------------------> *4
   -- (TLS) Finished -------------------------->
   <-------------------------- (TLS) Finished --
   <--------------------------- (HTTP) 200 OK -- *5
~~~
{: #ex-http11 title="HTTP/1.1 Reactive Certificate Authentication with TLS 1.2"}

In this example, the server receives a request for a protected resource (at \*1
on {{ex-http11}}).  Upon performing an authorization check, the server
determines that the request requires authentication using a client certificate
and that no such certificate has been provided.

The server initiates TLS renegotiation by sending a TLS HelloRequest (at \*2).
The client then initiates a TLS handshake.  Note that some TLS messages are
elided from the exchange for the sake of brevity.

The critical messages for this example are the server requesting a certificate
with a TLS CertificateRequest (\*3); this request might use information about
the request or resource.  The client then provides a certificate and proof of
possession of the private key in Certificate and CertificateVerify messages (\*4).

When the handshake completes, the server performs any authorization checks a
second time.  With the client certificate available, it then authorizes the
request and provides a response (\*5).


## TLS 1.3 Client Authentication

TLS 1.3 [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13] introduces a new client authentication mechanism
that allows for clients to authenticate after the handshake has been completed.
For the purposes of authenticating an HTTP request, this is functionally
equivalent to renegotiation.  {{ex-tls13}} shows the simpler exchange this
enables.

~~~
Client                                      Server
   -- (HTTP) GET /protected ------------------->
   <---------------- (TLS) CertificateRequest --
   -- (TLS) Certificate ----------------------->
   <--------------------------- (HTTP) 200 OK --
~~~
{: #ex-tls13 title="HTTP/1.1 Reactive Certificate Authentication with TLS 1.3"}

TLS 1.3 does not support renegotiation, instead supporting direct client
authentication.  In contrast to the TLS 1.2 example, in TLS 1.3, a server can
simply request a certificate.


## Reactive Client Authentication in HTTP/2

An important part of the HTTP/1.1 exchange is that the client is able to easily
identify the request that caused the TLS renegotiation.  The client is able to
assume that the next unanswered request on the connection is responsible.  The
HTTP stack in the client is then able to direct the certificate request to the
application or component that initiated that request.  This ensures that the
application has the right contextual information for processing the request.

In HTTP/2, a client can have multiple outstanding requests.  Without some sort
of correlation information, a client is unable to identify which request caused
the server to request a certificate.

Thus, the minimum necessary mechanism to support reactive certificate
authentication in HTTP/2 is an identifier that can be use to correlate an HTTP
request with either a TLS renegotiation or CertificateRequest.

{{aci-13}} describes how the existing TLS 1.3 fields and a new HTTP/2 frame
described in {{frame}} can be used to correlate a request with a TLS
CertificateRequest.  {{aci-12}} describes how the same can be
done in TLS 1.2 using TLS renegotiation and a new TLS `application_context_id`
extension.  Finally, {{setting}} describes how an HTTP/2 client can announce
support for this feature so that a server might use these capabilities.

## Terminology

RFC 2119 [RFC2119] defines the terms "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD" and "MAY".


# HTTP/2 Request Correlation in TLS 1.3 {#aci-13}

An HTTP/2 request from a client that has signaled support for reactive
certificate authentication (see {{setting}}) might cause a server to request
client authentication.  In TLS 1.3 a server does this by sending a new TLS 1.3
CertificateRequest.

The server MUST first send a WAITING_FOR_AUTH frame (see {{frame}}) on the
stream which triggered the request for client credentials.  The
certificate_request_id (name TBD) field of the TLS CertificateRequest is
populated by the server with the same value in the WAITING_FOR_AUTH frame.
Subsequent WAITING_FOR_AUTH frames with the same request identifier MAY be sent
on other streams while the server is awaiting client authentication with the
same parameters.  This allows a client to correlate the TLS CertificateRequest
with one or more outstanding requests.

A server MAY send multiple concurrent TLS CertificateRequest messages.  If a
server requires that a client provide multiple certificates before authorizing a
single request, it MUST send WAITING_FOR_AUTH frames with different request
identifiers before sending subsequent TLS CertificateRequest messages.


# HTTP/2 Request Correlation in TLS 1.2 {#aci-12}

An HTTP/2 server that uses TLS 1.2 initiates client authentication by sending a
an HTTP/2 WAITING_FOR_AUTH frame followed by a TLS HelloRequest.  This triggers
a TLS renegotiation.

An HTTP/2 client that receives a TLS HelloRequest message MUST initiate a TLS
handshake, including an empty `application_context_id` extension.  If the client
has not indicated support for renegotiation (see {{setting}}), the client MUST
send a fatal TLS `no_renegotiation` alert.

The server populates the `application_context_id` extension with the same value
it previously sent in a WAITING_FOR_AUTH frame.

Absence of an `application_context_id` extension or an empty value from the
server MUST be treated as a fatal error; endpoints MAY send a fatal TLS
`no_renegotiation` alert.

As with the TLS 1.3 solution, a server MAY request multiple client certificates,
either for different requests or for the same request.  If multiple requests are
waiting for authentication and require different certificates, the server SHOULD
immediately send the WAITING_FOR_AUTH frames with unique values.  Only one TLS
renegotiation can be in progress at a time, though a new HelloRequest can be
emitted once the renegotiation has completed.

A server MAY treat all certificates presented in the same connection as
cumulative, remembering multiple certificates as they are presented.  Note that
the authentication information collected from the client will need to be checked
after each TLS renegotiation completes, since most TLS stacks only report the
presence of the client certificate presented during the last TLS handshake.


## The TLS application_context_id Hello Extension {#extension}

The `application_context_id` TLS Hello Extension is used to carry an identifier
from an application context in the TLS handshake.  This is used to identify the
application context that caused the TLS handshake to be initiated.  The
semantics of the field depend on application protocol, and could further depend
on application protocol state.

Either client or server can populate this field.  A client can provide an empty
value to indicate that it does not know the application context, but would like
the server to provide a value.  A server can provide an empty value in response
to a non-empty value only.

In HTTP/2 clients always provide an empty `application_context_id` value, and
servers always provide a value that will appear in a subsequent WAITING_FOR_AUTH
frame.

~~~
enum {
    ...
    application_context_id(EXTENSION-TBD),
    (65535)
} ExtensionType;

struct {
    opaque id<0..255>;
} ApplicationContextId;
~~~
{: #acid-extension title="The application_context_id Extension Format"}


## Permitting TLS Renegotiation in HTTP/2 {#update}

The prohibition from Section 9.2.1 of [RFC7540] against TLS renegotiation is
removed, provided that the requirements of this section are adhered to.

TLS renegotiation MUST NOT be used to circumvent the other restrictions on TLS
use from Section 9.2 of [RFC7540].  Furthermore, TLS renegotiation MUST
negotiate the same ALPN [RFC7301] identifier (that is, "h2").  An endpoint MAY
treat failure to comply with these requirements as a connection error (Section
5.4.1 of [RFC7540]) of type INADEQUATE_SECURITY.

Note:
: A client need not offer cipher suites that might otherwise be offered for
compatibility reasons when renegotiating.  In particular, cipher suites on the
black list from Appendix A of [RFC7540] can be removed from the handshake.

In addition to the requirements from [RFC7540], endpoints that renegotiate MUST
implement the TLS extended master secret extension [RFC7627] and the TLS
renegotiation indication extension [RFC5746].  These extensions MUST be
negotiated and used to prevent serious attacks on TLS renegotiation.  If an
endpoint receives a TLS ClientHello or ServerHello that does not include these
extensions, it MUST respond with a fatal TLS `no_renegotiation` alert.

The TLS renegotiation handshake MUST include the `application_context_id`
extension when used with HTTP/2.

A server MUST present the same certificate during TLS renegotiation it used
during the initial handshake.  Clients MUST verify that the server certificate
does not change.  Clients MUST verify that the server certificate has not
changed; a different certificate MUST be treated as a fatal error and MAY cause
a fatal `handshake_failure` alert to be sent.

Once the HTTP/2 connection preface has been received from a peer, an endpoint
SHOULD treat the receipt of a TLS ClientHello or ServerHello without an
`application_context_id` extension as a fatal error and SHOULD send a fatal TLS
`no_renegotiation` alert.


# Indicating Stream Dependency on Certificate Authentication {#frame}

The WAITING_FOR_AUTH frame (0xFRAME-TBD) is sent by servers to indicate that
processing of a request is blocked pending authentication outside of the HTTP
channel. The frame includes a request identifier which can be used to correlate
the stream with challenges for authentication received at other layers, such as
TLS.

The WAITING_FOR_AUTH frame contains between 1 and 255 octets, which is the
authentication request identifier.  A client that receives a WAITING_FOR_AUTH of
any other length MUST treat this as a stream error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.
Frames with identical request identifiers refer to the same TLS
CertificateRequest.

The WAITING_FOR_AUTH frame MUST NOT be sent by clients.  A WAITING_FOR_AUTH
frame received by a server SHOULD be rejected with a stream error of type
PROTOCOL_ERROR.

The server MUST NOT send a WAITING_FOR_AUTH frame on stream zero, a
server-initiated stream or a stream that does not have an outstanding request.
In other words, a server can only send in the "open" or "half-closed (remote)"
stream states.

A client that receives a WAITING_FOR_AUTH frame on a stream which is not in a
valid state ("open" or "half-closed (local)" for clients) SHOULD treat this as a
connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.


# Indicating Support for Reactive Certificate Authentication {#setting}

Clients that support reactive certificate authentication indicate
this using the HTTP/2 `SETTINGS_REACTIVE_AUTH` (0xSETTING-TBD) setting.

The initial value for the `SETTINGS_REACTIVE_AUTH` setting is 0, indicating that
the client does not support reactive client authentication.  A client sets the
`SETTINGS_REACTIVE_AUTH` setting to a value of 1 to indicate support for
reactive certificate authentication as defined in this document.  Any value
other than 0 or 1 MUST be treated as a connection error (Section 5.4.1 of
[RFC7540]) of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.


# Security Considerations {#security}

The TLS extended master secret extension [RFC7627] and the TLS renegotiation
indication extension [RFC5746] MUST be used to mitigate several known attacks on
TLS renegotiation.

Adding correlation between requests and TLS-layer authentication addresses the
primary functional concerns with mid-session client authentication.  However,
implementations need to be aware of the potential for confusion about the state
of a connection.

The presence or absence of a validated client certificate can change during the
processing of a request, potentially multiple times.  A server that uses
reactive certificate authentication needs to be prepared to reevaluate the
authorization state of a request as the set of certificates changes.


# IANA Considerations {#iana}

The TLS `application_context_id` extension is registered in {{iana-extension}}.
The HTTP/2 `SETTINGS_REACTIVE_AUTH` setting is registered in {{iana-setting}}.
The HTTP/2 `WAITING_FOR_AUTH` frame type is registered in {{iana-frame}}.


## TLS application_context_id Extension {#iana-extension}

The `application_context_id` TLS extension is registered in the "ExtensionType
Values" registry established by [RFC5246].

Value:
: EXTENSION-TBD

Extension name:
: application_context_id

Reference:
: This document.


## HTTP/2 SETTINGS_REACTIVE_AUTH Setting {#iana-setting}

The SETTINGS_REACTIVE_AUTH setting is registered in the "HTTP/2 Settings"
registry established in [RFC7540].

Name:
: SETTINGS_REACTIVE_AUTH

Code:
: 0xSETTING-TBD

Initial Value:
: 0

Specification:
: This document.

## HTTP/2 WAITING_FOR_AUTH Frame {#iana-frame}

The WAITING_FOR_AUTH frame type is registered in the "HTTP/2 Frame Types"
registry established in [RFC7540].

Frame Type:
: WAITING_FOR_AUTH

Code:
: 0xFRAME-TBD

Specification:
: This document.


# Acknowledgements {#ack}

Eric Rescorla pointed out several failings in an earlier revision.


--- back
